# Non-negative Matrix and Tensor Factorization

## Introduction

Many of the most descriptive features of speech are described by energy;
for example, formants are peaks and the fundamental frequency is visible
as a comb-structure in the power spectrum. A basic property of such
features is that they are positive-valued. Negative values in energy are
not physically realizable. However, most signal processing methods are
applicable only for real-valued variables and inclusion of a
non-negative constraints is cumbersome.

*Non-negative matrix factorization* (NMF or NNMF) and its tensor-valued
counterparts is a family of methods which explicitly assumes that the
input variables are *non-negative*, that is, they are by definition
applicable to energy-signals. In some sense, NMF methods are an
extension of [prinicipal component analsys
(PCA)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principal_component_analysis) -type
and other [subspace methods](Sub-space_models.md) to positive-valued
signals.


## Model definition

Specifically, suppose that the power (or magnitude) spectrum of one
window of a speech signal is represented as a $Nx1$ vector
$v_k$, and furthermore we arrange the $K$ windows into an
$NxK$ matrix $V$. The signal model we use is then

$$ V \approx WH, $$

where $W$ is the $N\times M$ weight matrix, $H$ is the $M\times K$ model matrix and
the scalar $M$ is the model order.

The idea is that $H$ is a fixed matrix corresponding to our model of the
signal, viz. the source model. It describes typical types features of
the data. With the weights $W$, we interpolate between the columns
of $H$. In some sense, this is then a generalization of a codebook (see
[vector quantization](Vector_quantization_VQ.md)), but such that we
interpolate between codevectors. In addition, we require that all
elements of $W$ and $H$ are non-negative, such that we ensure that $V$
is also non-negative.

Since the model order $K$ is chosen to be smaller than either $N$
or $K$, this mapping is generally an approximation. The model thus tries
to catch *the relevant features of the input signal with a low number of
parameters*.

The model is generally optimized by

$$ \min_{W,H} \| V - WH \|_F\qquad\text{such that}\qquad
W,H\geq 0. $$

Here the norm refers to the [Frobenius
norm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_norm#Frobenius_norm), which
is defined as the square root sum of squared elements. We do not have
analytic solutions to the above optimization problem, but we can solve
it by numerical methods, which are included in typical software
libraries.


## Application

A typical use of NMF type algorithms is source separation, where we find
the solution of the above optimization problem and then identify those
dimensions of $H$ which corresponds to the different sources. By
retaining only those dimensions of $W$ which correspond to the desired
source, we can thus extract the desired source signal from their mixture
with the interfering other sources. For example, we might want to
extract a speech signal corrupted by noise by extracting the dimensions
corresponding to speech and removing those dimensions which correspond
to noise.

Note however that NMF-type methods extract only the power (or magnitude)
spectrum of the desired signal. In contrast, usually the input signal is
a time-frequency representation which has also a phase-component. After
application of NMF-estimation, we therefore need also an estimate of the
phase-component of the signal. Such methods will be discussed in the
[speech enhancement](../Speech_enhancement.md) chapter of this document.


For more information, see the Wikipedia article: [Non-negative matrix
factorization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-negative_matrix_factorization).

