# Why speech processing?


## Why speech?

Speech is our primary mode of communication; When you want to
communicate something important, you say it face-to-face. Think about
your first "I love you", your last job interview and a nice evening with
friends. Everything *important* is communicated in a spoken form.

Speech is *about* communication. A characteristic trait of humans in
comparison to other animals is our refined abilities to communicate. To
work efficiently as a group, we need to communicate. To learn from our
mistakes, we need to communicate. Where hand waving and smoke signals
can be used to communicate, speech remains as our best way to
communicate abstract thoughts.

However, a common idiom is "*a picture is worth a thousand words*". It
is also the reason why this document has pictures on the side. They help
in capturing the essential information. An important difference between
speech and images is however that where pictures excel in transmission
of information, speech excels in interaction. The game
"[Pictionary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pictionary)" is fun because
interaction through a picture is difficult.

Speech interaction is part of a large research in its own right (see
e.g. the book [Message
processing](http://pressbooks-dev.oer.hawaii.edu/messageprocessing/)).


<img src="../attachments/148294317/148294653.jpg"
data-image-src="../attachments/148294317/148294653.jpg"
data-unresolved-comment-count="0" data-linked-resource-id="148294653"
data-linked-resource-version="1" data-linked-resource-type="attachment"
data-linked-resource-default-alias="interaction.jpg"
data-base-url="https://wiki.aalto.fi"
data-linked-resource-content-type="image/jpeg"
data-linked-resource-container-id="148294317"
data-linked-resource-container-version="12" height="250" />


## Early communications technology

The expressive power of speech is tremendous, it is a powerful tool for
interaction, but in early human cultures, it was difficult to *store*
information. Story-telling was a way to memorize history, but our
capability to accurately reproduce stories is limited.

Cave paintings was an early way to store information more permanently,
and this technology later evolved to stone tablets, papyrus and paper
letters. Such ancient documents provide the most accurate information we
have about our past. We would not know about Socrates, without the
writings by Plato. Innovations in communications technology, such as
cave paintings, book printing and the Internet, have been so important
that they characterize historical eras.


<img src="../attachments/148294317/148294605.jpg" class="image-center"
data-image-src="../attachments/148294317/148294605.jpg"
data-unresolved-comment-count="0" data-linked-resource-id="148294605"
data-linked-resource-version="1" data-linked-resource-type="attachment"
data-linked-resource-default-alias="www.maxpixel.net-Painting-Stone-Age-Mural-Lascaux-Cave-Paintings-2115390.jpg"
data-base-url="https://wiki.aalto.fi"
data-linked-resource-content-type="image/jpeg"
data-linked-resource-container-id="148294317"
data-linked-resource-container-version="12" height="150" />


## Evolution of speech technology

Telecommunications was another milestone in human history. Though the
telegraph was an effective way for communicating, it also required
specialized training. The invention of the
[telephone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telephone) in 1849 was
therefore a great invention because it was the first technology to
provide instantaneous telecommunication without specialized training.

The first wireless ([radio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio))
transmission of speech came 50 years later in 1900, quickly to become an
important broadcast media. Again, while newspapers had an important role
in broadcasting news, the radio was faster and more accessible (does not
require the ability to read).

Another important step was the introduction of mobile phones in the
1990's. The importance of its impact is easily demonstrated by the
changes in our behaviour which are a consequence of the new technology:

-   Before, we would agree on a specific time to talk on the phone -
    "I'll call you at home around 18 o'clock.". The other party would
    then know to stay at home waiting for the phone call. Today we just
    say "I'll talk to you later". There is no need to know where the
    other person is and we also do not agree on a specific time.
-   Before, we would agree on a specific time and place where to meet -
    "I'll meet you at the main building at 12:15." Both people would
    then adjust the timing of their arrival to match the agreed time.
    Today, we can just say "I'll call you when I'm nearby."

In both cases, we are more flexible in our scheduling, making for more
efficient use of time.

<img
src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6a/Telefono_di_Meucci_-_Museo_scienza_tecnologia_Milano_02148-02147_dia.jpg"
data-image-src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6a/Telefono_di_Meucci_-_Museo_scienza_tecnologia_Milano_02148-02147_dia.jpg"
height="150"
alt="The world&#39;s first telephone invented by Antonio Meucci in 1849." />


## Further development

We have thus determined that speech is an important and powerful mode of
communication for humans. For improving technology, this gives two
prominent opportunities;

-   If we can make communication with speech easier using technology, it
    can be very useful. For example, if telecommunication, such as
    telephony, teleconferences, and voice-over-IP, can be improved, then
    that would allow people to use speech more efficiently.
-   We can use to our advantage the people's preference of speech
    communication. For example, interactions with devices and computers
    could be improved by allowing spoken interaction with them. In
    particular, typing on a keyboard and other tactile interfaces are
    difficult for children, the elderly and handicapped people, whereas
    a majority of people (but not all) can speak. Similarly, user
    interfaces based on visual information is often based on accessing
    information and services through menus. Using natural language can
    be more intuitive and simple to use; we could just say to the
    washing machine "Wash this small amount of dirty curtains. " instead
    of searching for washing options from a menu.

The devices and services which use speech and language are extremely
wide-spread. By now, a majority of people in the world has access to a
mobile phone and there are almost [8 billion active mobile-phone
subscriptions](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.CEL.SETS). If we
can improve the technology used by those 8 billion people, by say,
reducing energy consumption, then the impact of such improvements would
be majestic.

